

<!-- README.md is generated from README.qmd. Please edit that file -->

# Quasi-universal acceptance of basic science in the US

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Abstract

Substantial minorities of the population report a low degree of trust in
science, or endorse conspiracy theories that violate basic scientific
knowledge. This might indicate a wholesale rejection of science. In four
studies, we asked 782 US participants questions about trust in science,
conspiracy beliefs, and basic science (e.g. the relative size of
electrons and atoms). Participants were provided with the scientifically
consensual answer to the basic science questions, and asked whether they
accept it. Acceptance of the scientific consensus was very high in the
sample as a whole (95.1%), but also in every sub-sample (e.g., no trust
in science: 87.3%; complete endorsement of flat Earth theory: 87.2%).
This quasi-universal acceptance of basic science suggests that people
are motivated to reject specific scientific beliefs, and not science as
a whole. This could be leveraged in science communication.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## How to download and replicate

To reproduce the findings and re-run the analysis, do the following:

1.  Download and install this repository. You can use GitHub to clone or
    fork the repository (see the green “Clone or download” button at the
    top of the GitHub page).
2.  Open `everyone_trusts_science_abit.Rproj` to open an [RStudio
    Project](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/workflow-projects.html).
3.  Within the RStudio Project, open the `paper.Rmd` (alternatively,
    `preprint.Rmd` for a version with authors and affiliations) file and
    run it.

Please find the [session info below](#session-info).

*Estimated installation time* : If you have R and Rstudio installed,
then adding additional packages required in our R scripts is quick (a
couple of minutes)

*Estimated run time*: Rendering the `paper.Rmd` document takes less than
1min on our machine (see [session info](#session-info))

## Files glossary

- the two main files are the reproducible source scripts of the paper:
  `paper.Rmd` is an anonymized version for peer review, `preprint.Rmd`
  is the version for the public preprint on OSF.
- all files with the prefix `paper_*` or `preprint_*` are output files
  that are generated by these source files.
- `appendix*` files contain the appendices that are automatically added
  to `manuscript.Rmd`/`preprint.Rmd` when rendering.
- `experiment_*` folders contain all files related to the respective
  experiment. The `/data` folders contain the raw data (`qualtrics.csv`)
  and cleaned data (`cleaned.csv`). The cleaning can be reproduced by
  running the `cleaning.Rmd` files in the folder of each respective
  experiment.
- `qualtrics` folders within each experiment folder contains copies of
  the surveys run via Qualtrics
- `functions/` folder contains functions that we rely upon in our
  analysis scripts. To keep the `paper.Rmd`/`preprint.Rmd` document neat
  and readable, we wrote all lengthy code bits as external functions.
- running the `paper.Rmd`/`preprint.Rmd` file will generate an `output`
  folder which lists all figures generated by the `paper.Rmd` file as
  `.png` and `.pdf` files.
- `references.bib` contains the references

## Session info

    #> R version 4.4.1 (2024-06-14)
    #> Platform: aarch64-apple-darwin20
    #> Running under: macOS 15.5
    #> 
    #> Matrix products: default
    #> BLAS:   /Library/Frameworks/R.framework/Versions/4.4-arm64/Resources/lib/libRblas.0.dylib 
    #> LAPACK: /Library/Frameworks/R.framework/Versions/4.4-arm64/Resources/lib/libRlapack.dylib;  LAPACK version 3.12.0
    #> 
    #> locale:
    #> [1] en_US.UTF-8/en_US.UTF-8/en_US.UTF-8/C/en_US.UTF-8/en_US.UTF-8
    #> 
    #> time zone: Europe/Rome
    #> tzcode source: internal
    #> 
    #> attached base packages:
    #> [1] stats     graphics  grDevices utils     datasets  methods   base     
    #> 
    #> loaded via a namespace (and not attached):
    #>  [1] compiler_4.4.1    here_1.0.1        fastmap_1.2.0     rprojroot_2.0.4  
    #>  [5] cli_3.6.3         tools_4.4.1       htmltools_0.5.8.1 rstudioapi_0.17.1
    #>  [9] yaml_2.3.10       rmarkdown_2.28    knitr_1.48        jsonlite_1.8.9   
    #> [13] xfun_0.51         digest_0.6.37     rlang_1.1.4       evaluate_1.0.1

## Licenses

**Text and figures:** All prose and images are licensed under Creative
Commons ([CC-BY-4.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)).

**Code:** All code is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE.md).
